We're talking to—my middle initial is A, by the way.
I'm Arthur.
Arthur, I'm Andrew.
Tell me, how long have you been involved with, you know, let's start with the very basic— With the library?
I've been involved since 1988, when Art Agnos, who was then mayor in his first year, asked me to go on the library commission.
And then he asked me to be its president before the day that I was sworn in on the commission, which would then September 1st of 88.
He asked me to be its president.
And on the November ballot was the bond issue to build the new main library.
And he wanted me to go work on that, and he thought I would be a natural.
I used to be a state legislator in Nevada for a state assemblyman.
And he was an assemblyman from California before he was elected mayor.
And we hit it off quite well.
And so I went on the commission, and within a week I was out on the campaign trail talking to community groups about supporting the bond issue, which I didn't know a whole lot about at the time.
So, you didn't have a background in libraries or anything like that.
I mean, you had some experience in politics, which is helpful, and when you're dealing with the political issues.
Yeah, well, I was a journalist, and I had a bachelor's degree in journalism from the University of Nevada, Reno.
Oh, right.
I used to work, when I was in the Army, worked at UPI, audio services in Washington, television in Reno.
basically public relations, government relations here with the old Pacific Telephone, now Pacific Bell, part of SPC Communications as of April of this year.
And I've dealt with, in most of my 17 years in the business, I've dealt with government relations kind of issues, philanthropy,
social issues impacting the business and positions we should take, special interest groups.
Those have always been my focus.
For example, how does the corporation deal with the AIDS issue?
How does a corporation deal with multi-local services?
How does a corporation deal with minority women's procurement issues?
What should the corporation do?
Sometimes we try to get out early and understand issues that may be coming along that can help or hurt the business.
And, I mean, it's been my specialty.
And convince the business to do something or not do something.
We have a lot of consumer advisory groups we deal with.
We have agreements with special interest communities, the Hispanic community.
The NAACP, the Asian community, the consumer groups in general, meets every couple of months with us, a whole group of them, and we talk about a whole range of issues.
So it's how does a corporation fit well within the society, which is part.
That's kind of what I do.
How does a corporation fit?
Which is not quite public relations, although I deal with a lot of public relations issues.
I've had lobbyists reporting into me,
But my specialty has always been on that piece of it, the role of the corporation within the communities it serves on a policy level.
So what's your title, just for the record?
Public Affairs Vice President.
Okay, good.
So did Art Agnose, by the way, go to Bates College in Maine?
Do you happen to know that?
I went to college with an Art Agnose.
He's on the 60s coast.
It's Art Agnos.
Do you talk with him at all?
Yeah, I mean, his wife and I are on the library commission, Sherry.
That's funny.
I know it's the same Art Agnos.
How many Art Agnoses can there be in the world?
I mean, he studied, I was thinking it was Massachusetts.
Well, it's Maine, which is up there.
I think he's from Massachusetts, actually.
But he studied social welfare issues.
Yeah, I knew him in college, he was about a year or two.
Okay.
A nice guy, tough guy.
He caused himself problems, killed himself his first term as governor, because his mayor should not have lost.
But he did, because he was just too dictatorial to the groups.
San Francisco is a very, very difficult city, politically.
Oh, sure.
But I'm from Boston, so I'm not unfamiliar with the... I know Boston a little bit.
and some of the politics there.
This, you've got certainly no racial majority in San Francisco, and you've got a real split between sort of the neighborhood activists, which are the classic NIMBYs.
Meaning what?
Not in my backyard.
You know, you're going to do what?
You're going to do anything in my backyard?
No.
You know, that just doesn't work.
Well, you've heard about the Patriots trying to get into South Boston, right?
I mean, Boston doesn't want the Patriots, but it's quite specifically not in my backyard.
And change in the status quo drives people crazy.
Anything you want to do will bring out a certain set of activists, and then if it's fun, you'll get a pile-on of other activists.
I mean, this is a city that has a fair number of gadflies.
Each commission has got
One or two.
Some have got more.
We've got quite a few at the library in the last couple of years.
But their sole purpose is to attend and question and what have you.
We've got some now that sue us all the time over open meetings issues.
It's a fascinating thing.
It's a contact sport.
No question about that politics.
And it can be really, really tough.
And Willie Brown is paying a price for moving as much of an agenda as he has done.
He's starting, his huge popularity is finally starting to come down a little bit just because he plays tough, plays to win.
And the other side is play to win, too, like the big fight over the 49ers stadium.
They'll fight to the death.
They'll do everything to destroy the guy over time, you know, pounding him.
They'll finally get three different organizations that will come in and check the validity of the last election.
They won't stop.
Nothing phases anyone.
No matter how many times they turn down, they come back again and again and again and try to wear you down.
Agnos couldn't deal with it on as many forums as there.
Willie is just an extraordinary guy and is doing fine with it.
He's got the right attitude.
He's a pro.
He's a real pro.
I was out here in the late 60s.
I actually was in San Francisco for three years.
I mean, Willie Brown was a force then.
He's amazing.
He's an amazing guy.
So, you know, I'm pleased that I'm
You know, one of his appointees on his commission, and he likes the library.
It's not on his top ten list, but he likes the library.
He likes the library because it's important to have a library, or what do you think?
I mean, he likes the library.
He's carried library legislation during his time as Speaker.
When stuff comes up that's important, he's always been very approachable and interested in the subject.
He was a significant donor to the library in his own right, wrote us a nice-sized check.
We had a big fundraiser for the African American Center and raised money.
We had a big fundraiser for the African American Center, and they were, their goal was half a million dollars, and they were sitting at 460 or 80, I don't remember what it was.
And he took the microphone, and it was at, you know, a lovely auditorium.
He says, close the doors.
And he said, nobody's going to leave until we raise $500,000 in this room.
And then he just started berating people in the audience.
You know, what have you put in on this thing, $1,000, $2,000, come on, you can do $5,000.
$5,000, Mark, you know, Joe's going to do $5,000.
Sally, you know, you're as rich as they come.
You know, and it was boom, boom, boom.
And I think we ended up with $525, something like that.
Yeah, put it over the top.
Just amazing.
And plus he did a handsome donation in his own right.
So...
And he was fun in terms of the opening of the library.
Behind the scenes, he's been tough in terms of the problems we've had.
But I think he cares about the library.
I think he sees it as an institution that's important to the city.
It was important to him as a young man, as a place to go and, you know, study and what have you.
Because he's from a hard-scrabble life coming in.
That's one of the things that makes him so interesting.
He was a native San Franciscan?
Native Texan.
Oh, really?
Who came here and lived with his uncle, who just died.
in the last few months.
And so, you know, went to, did you go to San Francisco State?
I don't remember.
Then law school.
I don't know.
But it was, I mean, the library has played a role within his life.
He respects what they are to a neighborhood and to the city as a whole as an intellectual resource.
So he's been helpful, although it's not on the priority list when you look at the problems of police and
That's what you see in this.
That's everywhere, too.
That's what you see in this, the story of a city that basically, despite the politicians, has put together a decent library system that's on the rebound again after basically decades of official neglect.
So you came in in 1988.
And what did you feel your responsibility was?
I mean, to get a library, or did the library have to just enter the discussion?
Well, the charge immediately was to pass the bond issue, and then see the, you know, launch the building of the new main library, and address the policy issues that we had within the system for the library, and do it well.
If you go back, one of the people you may want to talk to would be Kevin Starr.
I chatted with him.
He's on that list, yeah.
Kevin used to be City Librarian in San Francisco.
He had a tumultuous time.
He opposed to helping him.
He was not supportive, initially.
His position, because he did a media thing for us when we opened the new Maine, in 1987 San Francisco had arguably the worst urban library in America.
Worst in what respect?
The facility?
The infrastructure?
How about the collections?
Facilities, the infrastructure.
I mean, there was no online catalog yet.
The card catalog itself was a disaster.
You had a few materials were in bad shape.
You haven't been buying much for years.
There was no cohesive plan on collection development or management.
The hours were always reducing.
within the institution.
It was an institution looking backward rather than forward.
I mean, he can talk to you about what was wrong with it.
He's quite a respected historian.
He's an historian.
He helped us on the Pioneer Monument fight, which is an example of the kinds of fights we've got.
Anyway, his other quote was that as the new library is opening in 1996, it has moved
to the cutting edge in some areas.
It is amazing how fast the library has moved as an institution.
He did not think it was ever going to be possible to see these kind of changes happen in an institution.
That has been both our strength and our weakness.
We have moved so far so fast that the culture of the institution, and even for some of the community dealing with it, they've had a hard time.
Tens of thousands of others, though, love it.
We're still doing 6,000 or 7,000 people a day in the new main library.
What are they doing?
Are you taking help when you get that many people?
They're coming in.
You'll see a lot of people go right to computers.
Some people go right to workstations.
People go right to books and materials they're interested in.
We have a large number of...
Small businessmen and investors, I mean, they just love going to the business section and pulling out investors' newsletters and that kind of stuff.
The Children's Center is always packed, both the Children's Electronic Discovery Center as well as books.
Children's books are up in addition to the great popularity of the Electronic Discovery Center.
People do just about everything you can think of.
People come in and meet.
Our meeting rooms are very popular.
They're always booked.
We do exhibits now that we never did before.
We have a little cafe, a little tiny one within the building, so people come in and stay a long time.
They do anything you would expect someone to do in a big urban library.
We have vastly expanded collections since we've gone from a—when I was fired from the commission in 90— Vastly expanded collections.
It went from a budget that was at $1 million a year to the first year the property went to $4.5 million.
We're doing about $3.5 million a year on new materials for the system.
Now, it's not necessarily books, though.
That could be computer equipment or whatever.
Not computer equipment.
It could certainly be databases, magazines.
It could be microfilm, but most of it's books.
Did you, in your mind, have a view of what the library should be, what it should look like?
What it should look like?
Not necessarily.
I started forming some views as we started.
I went around, tried to visit coming on the commission, visit the main library, set up meetings with people in different departments.
I wandered through some of the branches, listened for a long time at public hearings, see what sort of people coming up, what their problems were.
I spent a lot of time talking with staff because it's a non-paid position to be a library commissioner in San Francisco.
You don't even get paid for your expenses.
I tried to understand the institution, tried to look at its problems, and tried to bring my own background on it.
I found an institution that was polarized between the main and the branches.
I thought it was a really
almost scary way to look at an institution of the complexity that we had within a library, even the library that existed in 1988 when I came on.
And you always saw these fights.
Everything was, well, as for the Maine, you know, the rich Maine, well, the Maine was a disaster.
There's a column that I tried to find from you.
It was written when Ken Dowling came on.
It's really a hoot.
It talks about week 87.
We hope Ken Dowlin is the Clint Eastwood of librarians.
He refers to the old name as a disgrace, that the best thing that could happen to it would be a good fire, that the materials were hopelessly dated, new stuff not coming in.
This urine stench was overwhelming within the building.
It was a fire hazard, stuff stacked around in the hallways.
It was just a disgrace to the library world.
And that's 1987.
Ken had not started yet.
And who wrote that piece?
This was a columnist for The Examiner.
Interesting.
It would.
I'm trying to think of where I would have that.
We'd like to probably find it for you.
So I was concerned in looking at this sort of split between branches and neighborhoods, and I started wandering through the institution, seeing its different parts.
I went into the special collections section, for example, in the Old Main.
The librarian then in charge was not real happy about someone wandering through and looking behind the stacks, the closed stacks that she had there.
But I was president of the commission, so she really could not deny me.
And, you know, I discovered the Schmaluwitz Wit & Humor Collection, for example, which was, what do we add, about 30,000, 40,000 volumes.
Nate Schmaluwitz was a commissioner in, what, the 50s or the 60s, left the library's first endowed collection.
He left his Wit & Humor Collection.
Nate Schmaluwitz has to see the Schmaluwitz Wit & Humor Collection when you go there.
They have it written up on one of the, they usually do on one of the background pieces on the library, and see if I .
So you saw this collection?
Oh, I'll find it.
Like, I looked at that, and I looked at some of the other stuff, and I thought, God, there's some really great stuff here.
As I traveled around the country on business, I would always try to go in and talk to people about libraries.
You know, when I was in Boston, I went in at the, what's his name, Curly, who's your librarian?
I think his name was Curly.
Curly was either first name or last name, I can't remember.
But, you know, went in, saw the old library, which I think is wonderful, the new edition that had been done.
Met with his staff, took tours, talked to him.
Did the same with New York Public.
De Janeiro was the number two guy at that point.
Spent some time with him, met with his folks, toured the institution.
Well, what kinds of questions did you ask?
how they perceived their role in the community, the kind of collections they had, what the community demands were, what their usage was.
I talked a lot about fundraising, because I knew we had to raise a huge amount of money for the new main library, trying to figure things out.
Then I saw the Schaumburg, which I frankly had never even heard of before.
It's in my book.
And I loved it.
What did you love about it?
I loved the concept.
of an institution within an institution, one that spoke eloquently to the hearts and minds of a given constituency, one that was seen as an international resource within a given city boundary, one that was multimedia in its collection.
And I thought that was just about one of the great services I had seen in the library.
And I was determined we were going to do something
like that back in San Francisco.
And I didn't know what, but I got everything that I could on it.
And I even underwrote, so I had Pac Bell underwrite, an exhibit of Schmaluwitz, one of their exhibits, just to come out, just so that the old main library would start reaching out to communities that were not being served.
If you seriously looked at San Francisco's library,
few years ago, we had branches that were in minority areas, and they did modest amounts of things, the librarian that may be in charge of that branch.
But the main library didn't.
I went and visited the Eureka Valley Harvey Milk Memorial Branch, which was just a few blocks from my house, and thought it was really cool that they had started developing a lot of game materials.
just stacks of old newspapers, the various gay, lesbian newspapers in the Bay Area, and a modest little collection of books.
And I thought that was very significant for what it was doing to that neighborhood, but it didn't amount to much.
Why wasn't the library doing more serious kind of outreach to that community?
which was, is a huge community in San Francisco, and I'm gay myself.
So I'm sitting there looking at that and thinking, in the gay world, gays are often excluded from history.
If you look at what happens with the Hirschfield collection and Berlin, what have you, Byrne, gays are socially unacceptable, often.
There's quite a collection at Cornell now, you know.
But as a public library, they didn't exist anywhere.
Now, when you're talking about a gay lesbian collection, are you talking about published books, or are you also talking about research materials, archival materials?
Both.
So we started— I mean, to me, I think that could be one of the great, great things that San Francisco could do.
considerable population here of creative, artistic people who happen to be gay and lesbian.
And there must be extraordinary archival materials that you would be able to get access to.
And if you were able to do that, boy, I'd say, and I don't know whether you are or you aren't, but it would seem to me that that would be the kind of thing that you could really... Well, let's lay out what we did.
We brought it up.
to the idea of a gay Schomburg.
We brought it up to some of the gay and lesbian leaders in the community, and they were split on it.
These are people that were active, like we had an advisory committee to the Eureka Valley Harvey Milk French that just helped out with the minimal amount of stuff.
And there were probably about ten people at the meeting.
And I went in, I handed out some Schomburg materials, and I said, what do you think of the idea of doing a gay Schomburg in the new main library?
That we would organize as a community around that, and that we would seek to have both archival materials, research materials, as well as, you know, regularly published books and materials, that we might even set up our own center within the library.
And then they split.
Some thought that it was pie in the sky.
Some thought it was really interesting.
further and further down the line.
Ken Dallin bought in on it, said, I like the idea.
It makes good sense.
This is a community.
Because we had to look, if we were going to do something outside of what the budget provided, because the budget was just minimal, minimal kinds of maintenance within the system at that point in time.
The budget, you mean for acquiring material?
Yeah.
I mean, just the budget in general for the library system was really cheap.
I mean, would you say you're going to establish a gay lesbian center?
Are you also talking about, well, look at the traffic going home now.
This is really, pardon me for it.
Are you talking also, not only, I mean, the physical structure is wonderful, great, but are you also talking about getting staff, getting a librarian, getting somebody involved in acquisitions?
Let me just walk through what we ended up doing.
At Allen bought in on it, we found space within the new main library,
They had a number of round rooms that were going to be sort of like sitting areas, reading areas.
Affinity centers.
That's what we call them now.
At that point in time, this is 1989, we were still discussing the concept of this.
We'd have to raise money in order to do it.
The gay community, we thought, one is a politically influential, large percentage of the population in San Francisco is gay, lesbians.
We aren't doing much with them at all as a library institution.
They could raise the money to do this.
You mean the community could raise the money?
The community could raise the money to launch a center.
Although a lot of people questioned whether we could do it in the middle of the AIDS crisis.
But we started, I actually had a meeting in my... It seems to me that would be a good time to do it.
There's a lot of material that you ought to be... Well, okay, but you've got people that are giving what they thought at the time, everything they had, to the AIDS crisis.
I see.
And you're going to come in and, as people are dying in large numbers in this city, to ask people for money for an intellectual resource.
You're talking about long-term versus surviving.
There's only so much water in the well, sort of.
Only so much water in the well.
We had a meeting in my house, about half a dozen people, including Sherry Thomas, who at that point ran Spinster's Press, a women's press.
Chuck Forrester, and a guy named Jim Hormel, who is the heir of the Hormel Meet Fortune.
And we kicked it around, the idea, and decided we would take it to the next step.
And we organized a committee to raise money.
We set aside one of the rooms in the library for the Gay and Lesbian Center.
We set it on the second floor.
We then figured out how much money we thought we would physically need for the center itself, which was probably $250,000 physically for the space itself, to go from just the concrete wall to build a beautiful cabinetry around it and put in a nice ceiling, what have you.
But we set a goal of $1.6 million, and we decided that we would, as launching into this process,
that we would give a million dollars to the capital campaign for the library, and $600,000 would be set aside for the purchase of the acquisition of materials, for preservation of materials, to begin an endowment.
A million, we only needed a quarter of a million for the space.
We decided to set the stage then, for anyone else who may follow,
that anybody coming in to do something like this would have to put up money for the good of the whole, not just for the good of the group.
Chuck Forrester came up with this idea, which I thought was great.
We would make a $250,000 cash donation to the institution and have a naming opportunity for a room.
The roof garden is named as a gift from the gay and lesbian community of San Francisco, for example, just as a space for people to go out and spend some time in.
And the other half a million was basically paying for a percentage of bookshelves in the library, rugs, you name it.
A piece of all of that.
So a million dollars for that, $600,000.
We've raised over $3 million.
Wow.
We have, basically the excess money is all in the endowment, or sitting to go in the endowment.
Specifically for the Gay Lesbian Collective?
The center is called the James C. Hormel Gay and Lesbian Center.
He, I gather, was a considerable patron of the— He gave us a half a million dollars out of the three million that's been raised.
Wow.
He took four hundred thousand, went to the center itself.
A hundred thousand was set aside for the beginning of an endowment managed by the foundation.
And there's to be a community-based committee.
that would advise the foundation on the money that's sitting there.
So it started with his $100,000, and then we have rolled in hundreds of thousands more as we went over our numbers.
It's all not sitting there, but at some point it all will.
The foundation has just named that committee with Hormel's OK.
And we are now launching our cell.
I just did a letter today to the City Life Brewery, and one of the things we've got to figure out is how a
an institution that is frankly as inward-looking as this one has been for decades, how it is going to relate to these kinds of advisory groups.
So the Gay and Lesbian Center, one of the letters I've got left for her, again, also we've got a look at, Barbara Greer and her collection out of Florida.
She was with the lesbian Nyad.
Is she Nyad Press?
There was a lesbian press in San Francisco that was very, very active in the 50s, 60s, and she would have been one of the editors of one of the women's newsletters.
And she had like 10,000 books in her collection, plus hundreds and thousands.
We don't have the money at this point.
Some of the things that are on the table, use of volunteers and the union position on volunteers is, you know, that's a dirty word.
How we're going to set up the endowed money for hiring in specialized staff, and we're still, I would say,
negotiating through those kinds of issues.
The new interim city librarian will be involved in some of that.
I think she's going to be very, very successful at that.
So we're trying to set up what literally would be an international center for gay and lesbian material, both an archive and materials center.
You walk up into the second floor.
I think the room is quite handsome.
I think you'll probably agree.
It has a slightly domed ceiling.
You'll see a lovely mural in the ceiling.
How was that last year?
Okay.
And it's a very, very popular room.
We've gone through five or six little sign-in books or more, and some of them are very, very moving.
It's also the first vandalism that was done in the new main library was done in that room when someone with a knife carved kill fags into the piece of furniture.
Wonderful.
That's almost the kind of thing you want to keep, though.
Almost.
I mean, they sanded it out, but I thought it was perfect.
Well, it's a cultural thing.
Yeah, I called Jim Harmel on it, and he says, you know, Steve, we're in their face.
I would expect it.
So anyway, that's the Gay and Lesbian Center.
We then launched... I had called in a plan that we really tried to pull some of our resources out and get them out.
I was quite taken with...
the Librarian of Congress, Jim Billington, did a number of speeches.
He was here once, heard him talking about getting the champagne out of the bottle, and this is the people's, this referred to the Library of Congress as a people's institution, should be a working institution, should be one that's going to, you know, do things for the American public.
And I thought that just absolutely
fit what I wanted to see with this library system, the idea of getting the treasures of the library out there into the public so they could do more with them in an organized fashion.
The Dan Lesbian Center was clearly the creation of one, a community that was not served.
We talked about doing other kinds of things.
I wanted to see a marriage between the library and the African American Historical Society here in San Francisco.
We created
eventually an African-American center.
So you'll see centers basically within the library.
This was how we organized, how we did some of our fundraising, but also a way of bringing the community in.
Gay and lesbian, African-American, Filipino-American, Chinese-American, environmentalist, and children.
You run the risk of something like that.
I'm a Greek-American.
I might say, hey, you've got a lot of agnos as a Greek.
And this is what I would tell you.
This is what I'd tell you.
First, are we not serving your community in any meaningful way now?
Are you a large percentage of the population that we could do some programming with?
Would you be willing as a community to work with us and organize that community financially and intellectually to bring in resources?
And if you answered to all of those yes, I would say, well, we need to sit down and talk.
If there are only 500 Greek Americans in San Francisco and we already have a substantial collection, then I would probably say,
Do we need to do more on that?
But do you think a library should be getting involved in this, in that kind of community relations?
Yes, absolutely.
I think this city is one that is very proud of its diversity.
It believes in inclusiveness almost in a militant sense.
It wants to see
This celebration of diversity within the city, and you're seeing the minorities within San Francisco really coming in to an age of their own.
Willie Brown, as mayor, really just caps that.
And his view on diversity, we will find people of talent in all streams of society, and they will all take part within government.
We see these as honorific centers.
I mean, the gay and lesbian collection is not housed in the gay and lesbian center.
It is a place, and it was the first.
The idea was that when you come into the library, you know, the confused teenager trying to figure out his sexuality or hers.
Here's a room in a government institution that says, we value the gay and lesbian community.
or if they go online and pull up resources from that.
It's a way of making a political statement.
It's a way of serving kids that are not being served in most libraries in America.
Some of the donations that came in, some of the people who told the stories as we were fundraising were, you know, as I was a boy growing up in Wisconsin or Maine or anyplace else, you know, you never—you wanted to find a book about
what it was like to be homosexual, you would find either very narrow medical kinds of references to it as a disease, or something religious putting it down.
Very difficult to find a lot of materials.
That was Hormel's story, talking about when he was growing up as a boy.
Where did he grow up?
Where did Hormel grow up?
I mean, that was a Hormel plant out in Des Moines, Iowa.
That wouldn't be his.
Well, he's Hormel Mead Family.
He's the heir.
So he's from the Midwest someplace?
Someplace, yeah.
But we heard that from a lot of people.
I was trying to think of the one guy's name.
The guy that, the actor, Sir, British actor, did Shakespearean actor.
Not Ian McKellen.
Yeah.
He was here.
He gave us one of his books that he did a forward on for the collection.
He did a
a donor prospect meeting where he talked about what it was like in England growing up and what it was like to be a gay man, you know, 45 years ago trying to figure out who you were and why a library was so important.
I mean, there were hundreds of those kinds of stories about what that would mean.
So as a point of pride within that community nationally, I think we've really established something that really speaks out.
And it's not...
compartmentalizing.
It's not saying that gay stuff is all here.
I mean, it is mainstream within the institution.
We have just chosen to highlight certain aspects of it.
Well, you built the collection.
Let's see.
I mean, I'm actually going to ask to see what you have in the collection.
You know, I mean, it's one thing to have the center, but let's see what— You want to talk to Jim Van Buskirk?
He is assigned by the library as the director of the Hormel Gay and Lesbian Center.
Jim Van Buzzkirk.
And I would say we're still in our growing pains for making everything happen.
But we have done, even before we opened, we did three lecture series with the authors, gay and lesbian authors, coming into town as part of the Friends lecture series.
We basically subcontracted off their contract.
We just did a series with PFLAG, Parents and Friends of Lesbians and Gays, with authors.
He's done a couple of exhibits around Gay Pride Month.
You know, we walk in the Gay Lesbian Parade.
There's a bookmobile out there, and people go crazy over it.
What I would like to see us do, and these are some things we're talking about, is starting to look at private staffing coming in.
I wouldn't mind seeing us do something that would be a visiting research professor kind of thing.
You wouldn't call a professor, but someone who would come in and maybe be doing research in a certain area.
There's publications that they might get involved with.
Maybe we would be putting together, convening meetings within the gay and lesbian community of writers or publishers or what have you.
And not unlike what Schaumburg has tried to do.
You've got to look at us in our infancy.
Don't forget, Schaumburg started as the private collection of author Alfonso Schaumburg.
Right.
And then his collection was a combination prayer.
I mean, I wrote about it in my book.
Right.
And you'll see, like, the Gay and Lesbian Historical Society.
But that's really the, you know, the creation of one man's vision.
Right.
And we are, we have a vision.
We think his vision was—the vision of the New York public and what they did at the Schaumburg Center is a good one.
But it's a discrete, meaning it's complete, and it's by itself.
Now, you mentioned going to Boston.
Boston had its old beautiful library, 1851 or something, and they built another one next door.
You here in San Francisco decided to totally
I mean, like a fire, as somebody said, wouldn't have been such a bad thing.
I mean, obviously we're exaggerating.
It would have been easy to have lost all your collections.
But why build a totally new structure and get rid of the old one, especially now that, you know, you don't have room for all your books?
Well, the issue on that was just a political issue.
The building of the new main library meant that you got rid of the old one.
And before whatever went on the ballot, there was a deal struck politically with
It said the Asian Art Museum would come in the Old Main Library.
That was the deal that was cut politically.
They're moving out of the park, coming in, and will renovate the Old Main Library.
The new Main Library will be built, and the library will move its collection from one side to the next.
Yeah.
And, you know, this is, the British Library is moving from the British Museum to St.
Pancras, where they visited in March.
And, of course, they would love to keep that wonderful old reading room, you know, which is historic.
I mean, that's what Karl Marx did his work, and Schad did his work.
But, you know, that's already been promised to the British Museum to do something else.
I mean, this is not totally without precedent, what you're doing here.
Let's get into the problems, you know, that I've read about and heard about and which have, you know,
What happened over there?
I mean, I saw a tape, somebody sent me a tape called The Future Library that was done, I think, even here, in 1987 or 1988.
And, you know, this was, Ken Dowling has quoted on that tape saying, we'll have room for two and a half million books.
So clearly, when you were planning this library, you were not only planning to house your existing collection, but
to accommodate materials that you would be acquiring, I would assume, for the next 30, 40, or 50 years, or even beyond.
Was that part of the original equation?
Oh, I mean, yeah.
I mean, there's two and a half acres of floor space that's not there, based on a budget decision made by the city when they put the issue on the ballot.
We lost one of our floors, the whole basement level, about the size of Brooks Hall, basically, which you probably will see on the
Wednesday, I think is when you go home, was lost out of the budget because the guy on the Board of Supervisors Finance Committee said, a bond issue over $100 million is too big, nobody will ever pass it.
So we're going to take $20 million out of the proposal.
We needed $125 million or something like that.
And they said, no, I'm not going to do that.
And then they wrangled around a bit, and this was after the architectural
Feasibility study had been done that said how much space was needed for the Humane Library.
And basically one guy made the decision, the chair of the committee, and said it's too much.
Who was that?
That would have been Molinari.
Jack Molinari.
Ran for mayor and lost to Art Agnos.
And they ended up compromising.
They did $109.5 million.
Five million was to go to the branches for some renovation.
so that they could get neighborhood support, and $104.5 million for the new main library, but we needed $125 million.
So they started off by creating a very difficult situation when the bond issue passed, and I wasn't even involved in the library at the time.
So this is all stories that have been told to me so many times, though, that I think they're pretty accurate in giving the people who told me the stories.
So we ended up looking at what the need was for the building, and there was just no feasible way of building it, you know, the second basement level.
And so we took out two-and-a-half acres' worth of storage.
Why was it storage that had to go?
Well, you know, two-and-a-half acres had to be below ground.
I go in and I see this really beautiful building, I have to say.
It's striking.
That's a gorgeous building.
Gorgeous, but I also say, you know, 340,000 square feet
whatever the number is.
A lot of this could be shelf space.
It could.
I mean, we've had arguments with some people who came up and said, you should get rid of the atrium, you should be, you know, nothing but wall-to-wall bookcases.
I've seen that in the, you know, when you go into a place, well, like the Pompidou Center in Paris.
I think it's depressing as hell.
It gets...
massive amount of use, but as a physical space, I just find it a low ceiling and not inviting in.
And we did not want a claustrophobic space within the library.
And we wanted one that was inviting and would pull people into the institution.
We knew we had a problem on ceiling space, to do seven levels within what there are basically three in the old library.
But you couldn't go up any higher, because we had physical boundaries as to the width, the length, and the height.
We also—the reason it cost so much money to do the second basement was you're dealing in a very sandy, difficult, underground river environment in Civic Center, and enormously expensive to go down.
That's what you needed the big bucks for, to do that.
Well, the French library is next to the River Seine, too, and they can only go down.
That's one of the reasons they went way up.
But we could not go up.
We could not go up.
That did not fit the master plan.
We could have a building 200 feet long, 200 by 300 feet by 80 feet.
That is what the shell had to be, and then as deep as you could afford to go down.
So that was certainly one of the problems.
There were also
some decisions made on—as we started putting shelves in place—not putting them in place as we're doing the designing that would deal with the space—decisions made here and there for different decisions, which took away a lot of shelf space.
We had the Americans with Disability Act was passed in the middle of the design process.
No rules and regulations, but that created
great concern as to what we were going to do or not do to be seen as in compliance with what was going to be a very complex law, and how we would deal with people in wheelchairs, the width of the shelves, how high the shelves would be, how we were going to get people from one floor to another, how wide your aisleways had to be.
A whole lot of issues went in that were very complicated, and we had to work our way through on that.
There were a lot of issues that went in.
There was also an assumption, of course, that the library, there would be some management of the collection.
And basically, weeding has been something that has not happened in the city because there's been no money for new books.
So no matter whether a book has ever been checked out in the history of the library, the history of the book on the shelf, whether it's totally falling apart, whether it's covered in mud,
And a vicinity is you kept it on the shelf.
You did not weed your collections.
And there was always a sense that with some reasonable weeding within the institution, like other public libraries would do, that that would make the collection a whole lot more manageable.
They were also looking at a collection that was going to grow at about a million dollars a year in new materials.
And before the new Maine even opened, suddenly we bought $4.5 million worth of new materials.
Then another $3.5 million, and $3.5 million going forward for a number of years.
So suddenly there's a huge influx of materials.
We made decisions on things like the Gay and Lesbian Center, some of the other collections that started people making available.
We decided we would bring those into the institution and then figure out how we would find the space and do what needed to be done with them.
So you've got Brooks Hall over there.
What's the solution to that, and those books that are down there?
What's the long-term solution?
You've got about four or five different categories of materials there.
You've got what they call the city archives.
And they're in Brooks Hall, and they should probably be in the new main, right?
Well, you've got to understand what that means.
When they closed the old city hall and decided what they were going to do with everything, everything had to come out.
And it was decided, well, the library is officially, according to statute, the city archive.
So that meant that anything anybody's got, ship it to the library.
So we have got massive amounts of stuff.
Nobody knows what it is, whether it's any good or not, and it'll probably be years before anybody can even look at it.
So that's one category of stuff when you go down there, of our stuff.
There's also, I reckon Park has got a bunch of stuff down there, which is not ours.
Park.
So you've got archives, and God knows—I mean, that's self-defined as everybody who had a box of style.
You've got 10,000 to 15,000 books that were sitting in storage after the earthquake of 89 that were put in storage elsewhere, because the earthquake in 89 really destroyed the seven-level stacks in the old main library.
They were considered brilliant for 1918.
They were glass-floored steel, seven-level single set of book stacks.
And in the earthquake, they twisted the whole seven levels of it, and you had huge shards of glass and a million book stumps on the floor.
They all had to come out.
And we actually had to do it with volunteers to go in, because to even pull materials out, it was pretty amazing walking in some of those
some of those spaces with literally four-foot shards of glass sticking up, and you've got to walk in, and the whole thing is not secure.
So no one could be asked to go in there, but employees could volunteer to go in.
And then they re-hooked it up, redid the thing, and the public could never go into those stacks again.
And a lot of the stuff was just left on storage out in the Presidio, in one of the big hospitals out there.
We got Congresswoman Boxer at the time, then Senator Boxer, to help us with that.
Those 10,000 or 15,000 last pieces came in, but they were not cataloged under the online system.
They were not taken part in part of the inventory that went on.
So there's an inventory going on now with those.
They're being cataloged.
Almost all of those will be moved into the new main library this month.
And then how about future?
But the other stuff that's down there, you've also got the Hormel collections.
There are 10,000 books that I mentioned.
The Dorothy Star collection, which was a sheet music collection.
Down in Brooks.
Brooks Hall.
You've got the bound periodicals, which is the majority of the stuff that's in Brooks Hall in terms of bound materials, which, frankly, need to be looked at for even its relevance to San Francisco.
Some of it, yes, the old newspaper clips and that kind of stuff.
And a lot of it needs to find a home within the system.
A lot of it probably needs to find a home someplace else.
Stuff that it's unclear why we ever collected it.
For example, you will go down there and you will find every issue of, what, National Cement News?
Is that what the name of it?
There's a whole series of magazines dealing with the cement industry in the 50s and 60s, some of them even in the 40s.
And there's dozens and dozens of big bound volumes, and you look at it and you think, why do we have that?
There's a whole huge set of Canadian medical magazines from the fifties.
And again, you look at that and say, one, it's probably hopelessly outdated.
What if it turned out, just as a hypothetical, that you had the only run of national cement news?
And we'd say, is there a library that specializes in the cement industry?
And then maybe you will give it to them.
Give it to them.
If they want it.
Yeah.
I think we'd try to find a home for it.
Or, and you'd look at the other thing that we're in the conversation with, you look at the big storage facilities that UC Berkeley Library and others have.
Could we take part in some of those?
where we would share materials more with some of the other libraries and store some of our stuff.
And if you've got materials down there that say no one has checked out and they've been in the collection since 1930, are they really worth taking space in an institution that admittedly is short on space, or should they be someplace else where someone could have access to it?
So what's your take on that?
What's your view on that?
This is an issue I'm looking into in my book.
Yeah.
I mean, this is part of one of the challenges that we have.
Let me come back to this.
The final piece of stuff.
It's a very important issue.
Right.
The final piece of stuff that's in the old, in Brooks Hall, are books that professional librarians have weeded from the collection and are a waiting process.
So those are about the five areas of things that you will see in there of stuff that belongs to the library.
And that's another set of issues.
One of the issues we've got to deal with is just defining what is a core service and what kind of library are we?
We thought we had done that in 1990 and 91 when we did a whole series of public hearings on the library.
In fact, let's see if I can find one of mine.
Series of public hearings trying to put together a five-year plan.
The library commission.
The library commission, yeah.
As to what we were going to be,
You know, are we a research library?
Are we a public materials library?
And we thought we were cutting somewhere in the middle.
We are basically a public materials library, you know, where public comes in and they're looking for the newer kinds of materials, the reading, what have you.
You've got a solid collection for kids doing their homework and college kids coming in and people doing...
business work, like our business collection has always been very, very popular with the small business community and the small investors in San Francisco.
We would take some collections where we would see ourselves as going to research depth.
They'd be very narrow.
Well, like a gay lesbian collection.
San Francisco history.
San Francisco history, gay and lesbian, where there was, in the case of some of the newer ones, like gay and lesbian, where we could develop private support.
on top of the basic service that the city would provide.
Something like San Francisco history, we would see that is a basic service.
We would look at ourselves as being one of the best depositories for any kind of material in San Francisco history and not necessarily looking for private money for that.
But as we built other special collections out there, we would look at private money making a big difference in terms of
what you could collect and manage any programs that you would do.
There seems to be a difference of opinion with some people.
I have one woman regularly at every commission meeting who stands up and says, every book, every magazine, any piece of paper, any piece of information that you get, you should save and always keep it.
And you talk about what the Library of Congress's role is, and they don't do that.
And yet there are people who say, we should.
We should take on the role of being the National Library of America from a San Francisco perspective.
Every book, no matter how many copies of Daniel Steele you've got, you keep it.
Well, that's a ridiculous position.
But that is where some of the people come from.
And there are others who come and say, I don't care about all the book collection.
I want lapsed programs for my kid, you know, for three-year-olds or five-year-olds.
I want, you know, children's books.
I want your libraries open certain hours so my wife and I can go do something.
You end up with quite a range of views on a public library.
It's a public library.
Public library.
So you try to figure out how to accommodate that.
I thought we had reached a reasonable conclusion publicly, but obviously not everyone had bought in on it, and that created some of the problems when we opened.
Part of the problem we opened, we went from $2,500 a day
2,500 people a day at the Old Main Library on a good day, to 14,000 a day on opening day, and it lasted two months at 14,000.
Then it started going down a little bit to 12,000, and now we're sitting between six and seven a day, seven days a week.
So you're still getting six or seven.
So you think that then, by itself, is a validation of the library, then?
The fact that you're getting this now?
We're getting huge crowds, and they keep coming back, and people seem to love it.
It's a popular destination.
Well, and so, you know, Starbucks at Barnes & Noble is, too.
Are they going there for books, or are they going there for, you know, 7,000 visitors?
Great, you know.
I guess if they were coming in and taking pictures and walking out, and that was the majority of them, that would be one thing.
How do you know, 7,000 people walking through the door?
That's what our counters indicate, yeah.
So whether or not they're reading books or doing it?
There's no way of gauging the activities that they're doing.
You can certainly look at your checkout numbers, and our numbers are way, way up.
That's a good thing.
I think I'll ask about that, yeah.
We started to do the online stuff and then decided we couldn't depend on the numbers.
But there was, last October, I got a number that was, what, 250,000 people in October of last year had dialed into our website and into the
We thought it was a pretty astounding number.
Then the technical people decided it was not dependable enough, and so they pulled that sort of stuff back.
But, and we've not been able to count that kind of usage, but it is big.
The popularity, certainly, of our Internet access is big.
The popularity of our workstations is big.
You walk in the library, and I've walked in hundreds of times, you will see people doing a little bit of everything.
people on tables throughout the library sitting there reading, whether it's periodicals or books, a lot of that.
Clearly a lot of kids doing their homework.
We have small rooms, because I like what New York Public had done, where they had authors' rooms where you could go and basically check out a room for a period of time and do your research.
You will see we have those all over.
We have not really developed that, though, with the literary community yet, but you'll see kids go in and do studies.
They're glass shelves, glass wall rooms.
You'll see them five or six on almost every floor.
But you'll see kids doing their homework in there, doing language sessions, what have you.
And you'll see people doing just about everything, I think, when you walk in the library.
Plus, you know, wandering through the shelves, you'll see all kinds of people doing that.
I mean, I think people are using it as a library.
I think it's also a popular meeting place.
You know, a research place.
And as we work through the growing pains of going from a very tired, old, limited library to one that's trying to dramatically expand its scope, its scale, and the types of services it's providing, it's been tough.
I mean, the cultural change alone on going from where we were to where we are has been tremendous.
And some of the staff has been really resistant.
And the union has led that.
And how do you justify it?
You know, we've got to get into that, I think, at some point.
There is resistance from the staff.
Some of the staff.
I'm not, you know, going to be coy.
Of course, I've been talking to some of them.
You know, you've been talking to Annette McNair and Kathy Bremer, who's the chief steward.
Oh, God, who else?
I'm not going to tell you a little bit.
Sure.
But, I mean, I know who Steve you've been talking to.
It shouldn't be difficult for you to figure it out.
No, no.
I mean, the union position, when we asked them how to save money on the budget, this was when Dowling, just before Dowling left the system, was get rid of volunteers, get rid of private money, get rid of the book budget if it gets in the way of salaries.
get rid of the technology.
I mean, it was the most Luddite, backward proposal I have ever seen.
The newspapers dumped on them.
Even some of the gadflies that normally come were just up in arms on them.
And the union at the next meeting withdrew their proposal.
And they proposed, if you had to lay off people, lay them off in one of the other unions.
That's where the Librarian Guild came from.
And it was an embarrassment.
I thought it was an absolute embarrassment.
The guy that heads, he's not a steward, but he's responsible.